don't believe everything you see on a
product that you're buying because we're
being exposed to really toxic chemicals
that we know cause harm okay so I've got
everyday products that we're all using
is this good no what about this
absolutely not is this a good one yes
this throw that out good bad there are
so many issues with that this perfect
what about this this is one of the worst
products that you can use I've been
using it every day get rid of them
goodbye Dr Ivon burkart is a
toxicologist whose groundbreaking
research has unveiled the shock truth
about the hidden risks of toxins found
in everyday products and what we can do
about it we don't know what we're
exposing ourselves to because by law in
Europe and in the US manufacturers do
not have to disclose certain ingredients
but we finally have proof that there are
links to increased rates of cancer
infertility obesity we know that a
surface scratch on a non-stick piece of
cookware can release 9,000 particles
into your food and those microplastics
have been found in lungs heart brain
penis there's microplastics in my penis
yes and scientists have found that
eventually we will become more plastic
than we are humans if we continue at
this rate you seem really pissed off
about this I'm really angry that people
have to suffer I mean these chemicals
are causing children they have cognitive
delays they start having behavioral
issues and I think it brings up a lot of
emotions for me because I've been
personally impacted but I
think of how many millions of people
around the world are struggling and
don't know why so what are the most
important things that we can do to have
the biggest impact number one
this has always blown my mind a little
bit 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show so could I ask you for a favor
before we start if you like the show and
you like what we do here and you want to
support us the free simple way that you
can do just that is by hitting the
Subscribe button and my commitment to
you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power me and my team to
make sure that this show is better for
you every single week we'll listen to
your feedback we'll find the guests that
you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do thank you so
much Dr yon
burkart I've consumed a lot of your
content I've seen your videos I've read
a ton of your work just to start if you
had to sort of encapsulate the warning
that you're communicating to people into
a sentence what would that warning
be don't believe everything you see on a
container a bottle or a product that
you're buying why what's the consequence
is that if you're believing in the
marketing and what you see on the front
of the label instead of actually reading
the ingredients you could be exposing
yourself to toxins that you probably
don't want to be and what's what mission
are you on yon well I'm on a mission to
empower people
to avoid environmental toxins so they
can protect their families and really
using science and evidence to make
informed decisions that affect their
health and what is the the macro picture
here when you think about the world
we're living in and how exposed we are
to toxins do you think people are at all
aware of the toxins that we're consuming
every day I think now people are
becoming more aware but there are new
toxins that are emerging every day and
it's simply a consequence of how the
system is set up and it's mainly because
chemicals and products are not required
to be tested for safety before they're
released onto the market at least in the
US and many other regions of the
world and so what happens is people are
buying these products and we're being
exposed to chemicals that we have no
idea how they are actually impacting our
health if they're harmful or not and
we're basically guinea pigs in a massive
human experiment that no one signed up
for that we didn't consent to and what's
the risk well the risk is that we go
about our daily lives not knowing what
we're consuming or being exposed to and
then later on in life
unfortunately fall ill and suffer from
some chronic
disease are there particular illnesses
that are most closely associated with
toxins in our environment and toxins
that we're consuming every day yes so
cancer is probably one of the most clear
associations as well as
infertility and more widely known are
issues like not being able to conceive
having a decrease in sperm count sperm
quality and the fact that sperm count
has declined by 50% in the last 50 years
is pretty
alarming and who are
you I'm a toxicologist but I'm also a
mom what's a toxicologist so I study the
basic science of poisons how do
chemicals interact with the cells in our
bodies and how do they cause harm but
not only that how do our cells defend
themselves against these toxins why did
you choose to do
toxicology you know you could have done
anything with your life you could have
pursued anything I found it by
accident was it really an accident
though I don't know I think I was led
there I think I've always been
interested I think I think I was
meant to share
this and I think it brings up
um a lot of emotions for me because I've
been personally impacted but I
think of how many millions of people
around the world are are struggling and
don't know why and so if I can bring
awareness to
that then I feel like my mission is
complete but I studied toxicology
because just in my body I knew that
something was a Miss we need to study
this environment around us we need to be
more aware and more conscious of what
we're doing and when I was in undergrad
and I discovered toxicology I was living
the absolute conventional lifestyle and
sick all the time and wondering why and
just thinking that it was normal and I
Shrugged it off and it wasn't normal and
I reversed
it it's so personal for you isn't it it
is
absolutely
why not only because I've been
personally impacted
but I want my children
to to have the best version of
me so I can look after them and so that
I don't have to worry about them having
some of the problem that I
had and you scared about that I'm
concerned and I take action on it every
single day I think about it all the time
but not in not in a a scared way just
what else can I
do what else can I research what else
can I learn how else can I implement
this and how else can I share this so
that other people can implement it
because there's so much going on in the
scientific Community about these talks
chemicals that the general public
doesn't
know and we all have a right to
know we got any tissues
Joe thank
you didn't expect to
cry yeah I mean I mean I can understand
but it's it's Illuminating because it
really shows why you're doing what
you're doing and how much it means to
you which I think is really important um
and it makes it makes a lot lot of
things make sense frankly but also you
know I haven't had kids yet so I don't
have that lens that I guess comes with
being a parent and that concern of I
think about myself and I'm fairly young
so but but I can imagine in a world
where I had kids I'd become Ultra
cautious and ultra um thoughtful yeah
especially coming from where I came from
where I had those problems and just to
think if I can prevent that in my
children and and help people prevent
that in their children then that's the
best outcome for
everyone I actually did never pay
attention to toxins before I studied
toxicology I was in the lab I was
looking at really toxic chemicals
chemicals that we know cause harm and
cause cancer but as I went on with my
life I started to face more and more
increasing health issues increasing in
severity until I was faced with
fertility challenges and I was unable
and unwilling to accept at the time
that IVF or inital fertilization would
be my only option if I wanted to have a
family and I was unwilling to accept
that because I said wait a second I know
that there's an environmental component
to this there's chemicals in our
environment that are impacting my
fertility that's what I studied in the
lab I studied fertility and can cancer
so it was quite shocking to me that I
actually started to struggle with some
of these conditions but no one could
give me answers and what was missing
from my view at the time was these lowd
dose chronic exposures over a lifetime
to toxins and chemicals
in our products in our homes in our
outside world that nobody really has
connected to some of these disease
States and so it wasn't until I embarked
on a journey of self-discovery and
research that I started to uncover the
linkages between these lowdose
environmental chemicals and products
that we're using all the time and how
they impacted my health and when I
started to remove them and replace them
with safer options my health returned my
health recovered and I was actually able
to conceive my own children without
assistance how old were you when you
were first told that IVF was the only
route I was 32 okay and you'd had tests
done and stuff and at that time to see
if you were your foot sort of fertility
levels and things like that right I was
actually not having a cycle at that
point for nine months you didn't have a
period at all I didn't have a period so
that is quite striking because as a
person in their 30s people don't go
through menopause and have you know a
lack of a period until sometimes 50
years old that's almost 20 years earlier
than that that was really shocking to me
something was clearly wrong my body was
screaming for help and I had no other
option but to take matters into my own
hands as a toxicologist someone who's
trained and done the
research when you were told that you
know IVF is the only route what did they
say was the the problem
because if someone's telling you that
IVF is only rot presumably they're
saying that you're maybe implying
between the lines that you're broken in
some way or that it's normal not to have
a period at 32 like what were they what
was the what does the system tell you is
the problem with
you that's the issue is that they didn't
they had no answers they couldn't tell
me what the issues were they said oh you
look normal in tests but if you're
unable to get pregnant on your own well
the other option is ibf or adopt
and as a toxicologist was there anything
that you needed to relearn or reand
based on your training that you've
discovered wasn't true I had to relearn
almost everything because as a scientist
I was trained as a toxicologist day one
to follow the path that and the belief
that the dose makes a poison that the
more you're exposed to a chemical the
more severe the outcome and that's not
always true because as we know now there
are chemicals in the environment
known as endocrine disruptors at very
low levels have higher activity than
they do at hide levels so it's
completely backwards so I had to relearn
everything that I had learned as a
student in order to recover and in fact
I was so resistant and so hesitant to go
outside of what I
knew that actually helped uh kept me
stuck for much longer than I needed to
be did you say with endocrine disruptors
that sometimes lower doses are worse
than high doses exactly how can that be
possible they're called non-monotonic
dose responses that's a technical term
for it but it's basically because the
hormones in our bodies are present and
active at such extraordinarily tiny
amounts that any amount of excess or
chemicals coming from the environment
could trigger those same Pathways could
be devastating on a cellular
level and when you think about the
products that we use daytoday whether
they're beauty products or you know
might be a frying pan or a SP plastic
spatula or anything how many of these
sort of day-to-day consumer products
have toxic chemicals in them or at least
one toxic chemical almost
everything and it might shock you to
think that is almost everything but
unfortunately it is it's because our
world now is overcome with plastics
single-use Plastics plastic containers
food
containers almost everything that we
know of has some plastic element to it
and that's really at the root of a lot
of the problems that we have because the
chemicals that are used to create the
Plastics are leeching the Plastics
themselves are breaking up leading to
microplastic and nanoplastic release
that we are just being constantly
bombarded with on a daily basis and what
about beauty products because I had this
conversation with my partner recently so
we're in the process now I'm 32 years
old so it's that kind of season of life
where you start thinking about having a
family and kids and such and so we've
both become become pretty conscious of
the products that we're applying every
day from shampoos to deodrant for the
most part if you grab a product off of a
store shelf nine times out of 10 there
are chemicals of concern in them and
we're talking about major retailers big
box stores if you go to smaller let's
say health food stores and chains like
that then the percentage is much lower
so the you have a better chance of
getting a safer product at a health food
store and just to before we get into it
can you give me an overview of your
personal education and the career
Journey you've traveled that have
resulted in the wisdom that you have now
yes so I am a PhD toxicologist I started
studying reproductive toxicity in the
laboratory as an undergrad and we were
looking at the effect of environmental
chemicals that are pretty much
everywhere in the environment they're
the products of combustion so the
combustion of gasoline in cars um in
cigarettes in cooking so some of these
chemicals we looked at the impact on of
them on the reproductive system in males
and females and what we saw was pretty
striking such that when the animals are
challenged with these chemicals and
they're pregnant then The
Offspring not only the daughters and the
sons but also the grandchildren are
impacted by the grandmother being
exposed how does that work so when a
woman is pregnant with a female daughter
her developing ovaries which will then
someday become contain the eggs that
will then become the grandchildren are
also in the same environment as the
mother so what the what the mother is
being exposed to the baby is also being
exposed to and also her grandchildren
are being exposed so if a mother is
exposed to toxins her baby's babies are
being exposed to those toxins that's
exactly right so there's sort of a
generational
toxification
of people yeah that's called
multi-generational toxicity and it even
goes a step further transgenerational
that's when great grandchildren can be
impacted because what's happening in
utero is epigenetic changes so changes
to our DNA that are then being passed
down through our progyny so great
grandchildren even if they live a
perfectly clean lifestyle and haven't
been osed to toxins could have already
been genetically predisposed to
developing some of these conditions are
there particular toxins that you think
are especially susceptible to this sort
of
transgenerational passing down through
mutations in our DNA yeah it's the
endocrine disruptors things like
phalates bisphenol past chemicals a lot
of the endocrine disruptors that some
people are familiar with other people
are not but that are found in our
everyday products like non-stick
cookware the makeup and cosmetics that
we're using the plastic containers that
we're buying food
in what is an endocrine disruptor
explain that to me like I'm N9 years old
okay so in the human body we have eight
endocrine glands so they're little
centers in our bodies and they secrete
hormones and these hormones regulate
pretty much everything that you can
think of so from sleep wake digestion to
how well your brain works cognition to
metabolism so how quickly you can burn
calories uh how much fat you deposit how
much fat you can lose and also your
fertility if you're able to have
children someday so endocrine disruptors
are coming in and they're basically
disrupting like just as the name
indicates they're throwing the balance
off they're messing up with the
signaling they're causing everything to
go Haywire in our bodies so we really
need to be careful especially for
children whose bodies are rapidly
developing and then you're throwing in
these endocrine disrup chemicals it's
like adding gasoline to you know like a
dumpster fire basically and as it
relates to children are they especially
susceptible to endocrine disruptors
because they're in a developmental stage
absolutely so with children it's
extremely unfortunate that they are the
most susceptible and most vulnerable to
a lot of toxins because like you said
they're growing they're not able to
detoxify in fact a child's
detoxification capacity doesn't ful F
develop until the age of 10 years so
detoxification capacity what's that yes
so the ability of your body to detoxify
chemicals we all have it everyone has it
the liver and the kidney are the detox
organs the main ones but we have this
capability of being able to break these
chemicals down and remove them so that
they don't cause harm in our bodies but
with children that ability isn't fully
developed until the age of 10 years old
so if you think about all these little
children they're being exposed even
before they're born after they're born
and then they can't even get rid of
these chemicals from their body until
they're 10 years
old and what are some of the illnesses
or diseases that we see in children that
are have been heavily exposed to these
endocrine disruptors in our everyday
environment the worst is cancer so we
see an increased risk of childhood
leukemia with certain exposures there's
also neurodevelopmental delays so
cognitive deficits in children that are
exposed to these chemicals we also see
increased rates of
obesity obesity in children is
skyrocketing now unprecedented levels
that we have not seen before and it's
likely due to these chemicals and this
genetic predisposition and programming
that kids are just being dealt the worst
hand possible what about things like
neurod Divergence is there links between
things like ADHD and these endocrine
disruptors and you know ADHD autism etc
etc yeah there is a link actually so
some of these chemicals have been known
to worsen these
behavioral conditions like ADHD and
autism like you
mentioned and have they have they done
studies on this yes so there's
associations where they'll measure the
amount of these chemicals in children
through their urine or through their
blood and they'll confirm the severity
of these conditions and be able to
correlate it with the amount of the
chemicals in their
bodies and what about um the impact this
has on things like puberty because I was
reading some stats before that I think
it's is it women are having girls are
getting going through puberty earlier
and earlier or is it later and later I
can't remember it's one of the two it's
earlier earlier and earlier so children
who are being exposed to these chemicals
are experiencing earlier puberty earlier
breast development earlier um menstrual
cycles and what that does is actually
shift the entire window because if you
think about it we're born with a c a set
number of eggs in our ovaries once those
eggs are gone that's when you start
having menopause so what's happening
when you start your period earlier you
actually go through menopause earlier
and that can come with this whole host
of risk factors bone fractures and so on
and so forth and this is because of
those endocrine disruptors likely yes
how how would they
know they've done studies on this as
well so you can see that they've done um
observational studies where they'll ask
uh families uh when did your child start
using Beauty and personal care products
which are loaded with these
chemicals the children who used more
products have more phades more endocrine
disruptors in their blood and in their
urine and then they have earlier puberty
unfortunately and as it relates to
fertility generally in
adults are you aware of the shifts we've
seen in infertility like what are the
numbers how do you quantify the
changes well over the last 100 years or
so there's been a drastic decline in the
number of live births so that's one of
the numbers that I have looked at
recently right so it isn't necessarily
that more people um are experiencing
infertility it could be a measure of
people are having children later could
be um people are just having less
children but it is an overall measure of
uh population level so it looks like
there's just less children being born
and that could be for a whole number of
reasons right are people not able to
have kids are they choosing not to have
kids I would almost argue that it's the
fact that people are not able to have
kids when you correlate that with the
fact that sperm counts have declined by
50% worldwide that is absolutely
astonishing we're not at the point yet
where humans will go
extinct but if we continue on this path
and don't make changes which there are
many ways that we can make
changes then we might be looking
at population decline
isn't it the job of the FDA or some kind
of government body to regulate the
chemicals that are in our everyday items
you would think right in Europe the
European commission has a much better
system of regulating chemicals so they
require upfront Chemical Testing
depending on the amount that is produced
so chemical manufacturers need to
provide data so they have to fund these
studies
these laboratory studies they have to
fund them and provide this package of
information to the European chemicals
agency or eeka and once they do that
then based on the amount that they're
producing you have to give more
information you have to have more
testing such that if you're producing
several metric tons of a chemical you've
got to do a whole bunch of studies to
really prove that it is safe not only
for people but also animals and the
environment that it's not going to be
something that is persistent that builds
up that can't be broken down that starts
to accumulate because that's what we're
seeing now with some of these chemicals
and that's really the problem is that
they don't break down they don't go away
they don't disappear so then what
happens it basically disrupts the entire
ecosystem of the planet and we're we're
not disconnected from that right we're
connected to the ecosystem we rely on
that so if if we're looking at it from
the standpoint that testing of chemicals
upfront that is absolutely something
that we should should be doing but no
one is really mandating that except in
Europe why don't they mandate it in
other parts of the world like the United
States our system wasn't set up like
that over here I think we've got a
different
relationship um with between the
government and with industry I think
there is a lack of regulations a lack of
requirements for toxicity testing
combined with the lack of corporate
responsibility so a lot of these
manufacturers don't want to have to foot
the bill and pay millions of dollars to
have testing only to show that this
chemical that they are so excited in
love with can't be used because it's
toxic do you think it is malicious and
intentional in terms of do you think
there's a concerted effort to make sure
that the government doesn't increase
regulation on these industries so that
they can continue to produce lowcost
items that
are have long shelf lives and um are
cheaper I would hope not but it's
looking like that and it's just this
whole system is not set up to protect
consumers and then the environment at
least in the US so you you don't have
your period yourself you're told that
you your best option is to go do
IVF you then go on a bit of a journey
yourself to unlearn lots of things you
learn in toxicology
training what was the ending to that
story in terms of what did you do then
did you go find a different doctor did
what did you change and what is the
ending of that story well I fell down a
rabbit hole of research and I had to
pick myself up and say hey you know what
I'm going to take matters into my own
hands I'm going outside of the route
that I thought I was supposed to go down
the mainstream route so I kind of went I
went sideways a little bit and I went
with integrative and functional medicine
and so I went looking for the root cause
the root cause which is not necessarily
what I was being guided toward with the
conventional route so with integrative
and functional medicine there was
personalized testing and of course this
was all upfront cost for me but this was
something that was absolutely vital so I
found a way to pay for these tests and
they told me exactly what I'm deficient
in what I need to do and they guided me
so I first started with removing
inflammatory foods and really dialing in
on my diet and I saw relief from my
symptoms in within two weeks very rapid
once I started removing these triggers
that were causing digestive problems
then I started to see Improvement very
fast but it was then going on six months
and I kind of felt like I hit a plateau
said there's something else that's still
triggering me there's something else
that's still bothering me and I don't
feel 100% even though I've done all the
work I've cleaned up my diet I cook all
my meals at home I have sourced the best
Quality Meats and vegetables I even
started growing my own food and there
was still something there something was
not not right and so then I started
targeting things in my home my makeup
cabinet in particular was a huge source
of trigger for me in terms of chemicals
and toxicity once I started to clean out
my makeup drawer I really saw a shift
because of what I was doing on a
day-to-day basis I was using several
cosmetic products I was absolutely
obsessed with perfumes and fragrances
once I removed those one by one slowly
disentangling myself from their just
being obsessed with them I started to
see real change and I noticed more
energy return I was feeling more fit I
had more mental Clarity more Focus I
didn't have as many headaches and
migraines anymore and I just started to
feel like a more vital person like more
vitality and did your period return it
did it did return and it returned and I
was pregnant within nine months of that
first the first time when I started this
whole journey within nine months I was
pregnant I had my period back within I'd
probably say three months and then six
months after that once I got rid of all
the beauty and personal care products I
also looked into my Oral Care my oral
health I had Mercury amalgam feelings
and Mercury is extremely toxic to
reproduction but also to the brain once
I got rid of the Mercury out of my teeth
that was when things just really took a
nice a huge leap in my in my health jour
journey and how were you able to measure
the improvements I know you can say you
know I felt better but could you measure
the improvements biochemically in a lab
somehow Yes actually that was part of
this entire Journey so there was regular
routine testing going on whenever we
made changes I was working with these
practitioners and I made changes and we
would do tests and say look your numbers
came back it looks great you removed the
Mercury amalgam fillings from your teeth
your mercury levels have dropped really
yeah it was pretty shocking and I felt
almost instantly better when they took
those out of my mouth it was that
striking of an effect knowing what you
know surely it's built up a bit of um I
don't know a bit of a if I knew all that
you knew I think about toxins in our
environment I would be a a really
annoying person at like every dinner
party and B there'd be a certain sense
of I guess emergency and urgency to me
because I'd be looking around all my
friends and I'd be if I understood the
consequences of them drinking from that
plastic container or putting that
product on their face I feel like I'd
trying to be Shout Shout at the world to
tell them to stop do you do you feel a
sense of that you you directly witnessed
the impact that making these changes and
detoxifying your environment had on you
do you feel a sense of like you
know absolutely I mean I can't even tell
you how much passion it has ignited in
me to be able to share this information
and spread it as far and wide as
possible because it's literally
affecting every single person on this
planet and I do find it sometimes
challenging not to call someone out and
say hey be careful with that but you
know I think it comes from being a
living example and I found that that is
much more effective at being a living
example instead of telling people don't
do this don't do that showing them
what's possible look at what happened to
me look at my journey look at the
benefit that I feel and then once to
start removing these things and making
these simple swaps it's about simple
small incremental shifts that anyone can
do over the long term because it's
really about uh it's a marathon not a
race it's not about you've got to throw
everything away and you've got to hide
under a rock because I tried that and it
didn't work and it caused more stress
and stress is harmful MH so being a
living example empowering people with
information educating about the problem
but coming with the
solution you mentioned cancer is one of
the downstream consequences of living in
a toxic
environment and we talked about how
sperm quality has reduced over the last
couple of decades when we look at the
stats around cancer are there any stats
in particular that you think are most
clearly associated with us living in
such such a to toxic environment one of
them that always brings to mind is
breast cancer because I I think I read
or heard that breast cancer is on the
rise or has been rising for the last
couple of decades and when you look at
the Western World versus something like
you know a tribe in in Africa they don't
see the same levels of breast cancer
yeah that is definitely a concern
because cancer historically was a
disease of age aging it wasn't so common
that you see cancer in your 30s 40s and
even 50s now we're seeing a shift the
window is moving earlier and earlier
cancer incidence like you said breast
cancer incidence is definitely on the r
I myself never knew anyone that suffered
from breast cancer or survived it until
I hit my 30s then I knew five people
that had it including two people that I
worked with in the toxicology lab and
what are your suspicions about the root
causes of this Rising
cancer I definitely think there is an
huge environmental component to it
because a lot of what was believed
decades ago was that disease and cancer
incidents had to do with your genes you
were just genetically
predisposed you were unlucky but in
actuality what we're seeing now is that
the environment plays such a massive
role in whether or not you actually have
cancer so just because you have the pre
disposition to developing breast cancer
such as the braco gene doesn't mean
you'll get it it really depends on your
lifestyle and how you lived but also how
your ancestors lived right we talked
about about the multigenerational effect
of these chemicals depending on how your
ancestors lived how your grandmother and
how your mother lived could predispose
you to this and have there been any
studies that show the impact of these
sort of everyday chemicals on cancer
risk yes and that's something that is I
don't want to say that it's exciting but
I'm glad that we finally have proof I
don't want to see these studies I I hate
seeing this actually I'm really angry
that people have to suffer with cancer
because it's so
preventable there was a study recently
that looked at removing certain
ingredients from Beauty and personal
care products so women without any
history of breast
cancer were asked to remove these
ingredients from their products for 28
days so that's very short four weeks
right they took cells from the breast
tissue they were all normal they
measured the amount of breast cancer
gene
expression after 28 days they took
another sample so after 28 days of
removing these ingredients they took
another sample and they saw that the
breast cancer gene expression
dropped and the only thing that they
were asked to change about their
lifestyle was to remove these
ingredients from their beauty and
personal care products and which
products were they told to remove and
what ingredients were those it was skin
care deodorant shampoo things that most
people are using and the ingredients
were
phades which can often be found in
fragrance so the seemingly innocuous
little term on the ingredients list
fragrance or
parfume can contain a huge number of
chemicals it's hidden behind this
umbrella term because by law in Europe
and in the US manufacturers do not have
to disclose this it is considered trade
secret and within that chemical mixture
are known
carcinogens endocrine disruptors like
phalates and the most potent allergens
known to
man and with phalates the reason that
they're in fragrances and that
manufacturers love them so much is there
what are known as film formers so it
helps the fragrance to stick to surfaces
like your skin your clothing and it
helps to make it last longer and linger
so if you've ever sprayed something on
yourself and are still able to smell it
hours later that's a Telltale sign that
you've been exposed to thetes that you
have thetes in that fragrance in that
product and how many deant on the Shelf
have phalates in them if it's got a
fragrance in
it almost all of them okay it's code
it's code for endocrine disrupting
valades essentially you can assume that
and in fact it's safe to assume that
they contain allads so I mean this is
one of the deodrants that I often use um
it's just a I mean for anyone that's
just listening it's just like one of the
doents You' find on a shelf in any store
that comes in a little is this an
aluminium can yeah it is an aluminium
can does this have thetes in it how do I
know so you turn turn The Container
around and check the ingredients list do
you see a word fragrance or SL parfume
yeah fragrance brackets
parfume that's what you're looking for
okay so I shouldn't be spraying this all
over my body right okay so sometimes
you'll see on there it'll say th free
okay right that's helpful but that still
doesn't take away the fact that there
are known carcinogens and allergens in
there so if you've got any kind of
respiratory problems any kind of skin
problems and you just don't want to
expose yourself to unnecessary
carcinogens then it would be beneficial
to avoid fragrance what about a little
spray just
a I mean it depends is that really going
to benefit you is are you going to get
any effect from that little spr want to
smell so this is why I spray this
because you know this top is quite tight
so if if it's tight and it's hot in here
I'll end up smelling so I just spray it
and then I'm really do it's public
service for other people really I'm fine
to smell myself I can't even smell it
but it's for you know Jack and the team
well the question would be can you find
a safer alternative and the answer is
yes how do I find a safer alternative
what am I looking for so you don't want
fragrances and you definitely yes so
avoid the word fragrance unless it says
that the fragrance comes from essential
oils okay but but if it comes from
essential oils will it still make me
smell nice yes okay yes because that's
where aromatic compounds come from they
come from plants but just to give you
more context on this aerosol spray this
is one of the worst products that you
can use I've been using it every day
yeah so I'll tell you why aerosols use
propellants propellants are derived from
petroleum and there was a recall on
thousands of products within the last
couple years that the propellants were a
source of benzene contamination and
Benzene is a known human carcinogen that
you do not want to be inhaling because
what you inhale goes to your brain it
goes quickly all over your body through
the bloodstream you don't want to be
delivering a known human carcinogen into
your bloodstream you're just it's not
helping you at
all because Benzene is known to cause
leukemia in
people so it's a no-brainer if you want
to avoid that to avoid aerosols but not
only that if you think about how you're
actually applying the product you're
spraying it like this right in a stream
and it heads toward your face then
that's also an inhalation risk because
there's particles in there there's
solids in there you don't want to be
inhaling unnecessary things so the best
option for deodorant is to look for
something that has essential oils and is
a roll on or a stick solid is there
anything on the label that I can trust
when it comes to doents is is there like
a certain term that I'm looking for you
said phate 3 phate 3 is there anything
else that yes so dalite free and paraben
free are definitely helpful okay because
then we know at least two of the known
endocrine disruptors that we have
evidence on are not found in that
product but that doesn't exonerate
everything else we still need to be
diligent about the ingredients because
they are sources of contamination of
byproducts of carcinogens and hidden
toxins essentially it is pretty crazy
that I could get a lighter and go and it
would be flammable and then I spray that
on my body like like it's like I'm
lathering myself in petrol or something
it is pretty crazy that's essentially
what that is petrol yeah because it's
coming from petroleum all the
propellants and some of the other base
ingredients I'm sure I haven't looked at
it but I'm almost certain because that
is the source of the majority of
ingredients go into these products this
is my last day ever using aerosol
deodrant let's pull up a
bin
okay
goodbye okay that's gone okay is this a
better alternative what I've got here is
I've got this roll on deodrant which I
think is one of the refillable ones um
is this a better
alternative at least from this level of
what I know of the fact that it's a
solid yes but I have to see the
ingredients list we have to look at the
ingredients list to really know what's
actually in the deodorant okay so at
least from a sustainability standpoint
that's definitely great to see that it's
not in a plastic container that is
refillable but we really need to check
the ingredients okay so I've got the
ingredients list here I've just pulled
it up on my
iPad it says tapioca
starch baking soda sunflower seed
wax Coco seed butter
Toral exate no idea what that is sterile
alcohol perfume so do you recognize the
ingredients are they easily recognizable
or do they sound highly synthetic very
chemical like it says par
perfume is there any indication on
what's in the perfume all antiag are
scented with a blend of fragrances to
give you the scense you love hm is there
any indication that it's salad free and
parin
free no that's what should give us pause
is when we don't know what's in that
fragrance term that's really the
issue okay I mean there's just so many
bloody
words phate free
deodorant I've got a better way that I
can help you search okay if you just
type in the word organic and then
whatever product you're looking for
organic deodorant that is going to
whittle down the choices significantly
for you well and you're saying that if
it's organic it that means that it won't
contain the phalates and the parabens
not necessarily this is where it gets a
little bit nuanced but at least it
whittel down the results that you'll get
in sege and then you can check the
ingredients one by one and look for the
one that has essential oils instead of
the word fragrance because it's really
the lack of transparency that should
make us pause we have no idea what's in
there we don't know what we're exposing
ourselves too and if you're someone who
is concerned about the chemicals in the
products you're using the toxins you're
being exposed to if you are someone who
is thinking about getting pregnant are
pregnant
breastfeeding or just health conscious
and you don't want these toxins in your
products then this is the work that
needs to be done interesting so just
because it's a roll on doesn't
necessarily mean it's safe right okay
like you just demonstr
and just because it's sustainable also
doesn't mean it's safe so there's a
there's a lot of marketing that goes on
with products and and manufacturers know
that consumers are becoming Savvy
they're becoming aware and they're
demanding safer products so they will
hit all of the buttons and hope that
somebody isn't diligent and doesn't see
through that is fragrance so important
because fragrance is an indicator that
it contains these Fates and parabens is
that why I should be thinking fragrance
is one indicator for whether the
cosmetic product is toxic or not yeah
definitely that would be probably the
easiest and most obvious way that you
can weed products out is just look for
the word fragrance or parfum and if
there's no indication that it comes from
plants that it's from essential oils
then that's not something that you want
to use I read a stat that said 91% of
antier Sprints 95% of shaving products
83% of moisturizers and 63% of
sunscreens contain fragrance and 96% of
shampoos 98% of conditioners 97% of hair
styling products um contain fragrance as
well why are they putting fragrance and
everything would would the products not
sell if there weren't fragrance in there
yeah I think it's there's many reasons
that they put fragrances in so first of
all we are sensory beings and people
respond to fragrances fragrances changes
your mood it uplifts your mood it helps
you feel more confident fragrances
affect us on a very Primal level and the
earlier and earlier that you can get
hooked on frag es the better for these
manufacturers right so that's why
they're putting fragrances in even
children's products and scented
everything if you notice I've got kids
we go out and look for slime I said
let's look for unscented slime it's
nearly impossible to find it you'd have
to make your own slime at home so that's
what we've started doing and the kids
love it because they get to you know be
like little chemists or whatever but you
cannot find
even even they have markers pens crayons
they've got sent ented stickers I mean
scented everything scent is everywhere
now the fragrance industry has
absolutely
exploded in the last 10 or 15 years and
fragrances are the most pervasive Source
One of the most pervasive sources of
toxins in our homes in our daily lives
it's almost like the new secondhand
smoke that's how prevalent it is because
the chemicals once you spray them right
the reason you smell them is because
they have volatilized means that they
have become gases and they reach your
nose you smell them what that also means
is that they are in the air Studies have
shown that these fragrance chemicals
phalates carcinogens allergens they bind
to the dust in your home so it's not
like I smell this fragrance I sprayed it
three hours ago and I'm totally fine
well it's still in the air it's always
going to be in the air unless you
physically remove the
dust so if you're not regularly dusting
mopping sweeping and vacuuming you're
becoming re exposed and this is
absolutely the worst for a child a baby
who is crawling on the floor their faces
and noses and Airways are close to the
ground so they're inhaling the dust that
have settled on the floor I don't know
many people that are sweeping and
dusting every single day but if you if
you have a child then really I really
want you to listen to this because the
child is putting stuff in their mouth so
they're ingesting these dust particles
they're ingesting the chemicals that are
attached to the dust particles they're
inhaling them and they can't detox them
they can't detoxify them from their
bodies and so then what happens they
grow up they start having allergies they
start having cognitive delays they start
having behavioral issues they start
storing more fat they can't lose weight
they have low energy depression and a
host of conditions that we think are are
common but doesn't mean they're normal
and they're avoidable that's that's the
part that is so
important is that these conditions are
avoidable I was just reading about
allergies as you speaking and it's I've
got some stats here food allergies um
the prevalence of food allergies in
children have increased by 50% since the
1990s in the United
States in terms of seasonal allergies in
2021 approximately 81 million Americans
were diagnosed with allergic ritis also
known as hay fever or seasonal allergies
by 2018 nearly
42 million Americans or 133% of the
population had been diagnosed with
asthma in their
lifetime and I mean why is this
happening I mean there's like BBC
articles here that show there's been
huge increases in allergic reactions as
well um the EpiPen businesses on the
rise why are allergies getting worse in
your opinion yeah I think it's this
pervasiveness of the overuse of
fragrances scented products products and
the lack of awareness about the harm
that they cause there's there's studies
showing that there people who as soon as
you light a candle then people start
having migraines they can't think
straight anymore they become dizzy but
not only that like you said increased
asthma incidents once you get asthma it
doesn't go away you have reactive
Airways so then you're triggered again
whenever you encounter these chemicals
what about people who say the Oles have
exploded over the last couple of years
because we're not letting our kids
consume more dirt I hear this a lot
people say it's because we're becoming
too sanitized and our kids need to go
play in the mud that could be it as well
but I would almost I would like to see
the data in the rise in fragrances and
fragrance use overlaid on top of the
incidents of allergies in children and
all of these health conditions I want to
see that data I haven't seen it yet and
I'm hoping that somebody does these
these studies because I think they would
be correlated have you done any research
on you know I always I love thinking
about other populations and
civilizations and that aren't exposed to
the environmental factors we're exposed
to and seeing how they're getting on in
terms of their health outcomes when
they're not exposed to microplastics and
fragrances you know like some of the
tribes in Africa that are still pretty
close to being um un contaminate like
contaminated by human interference in
the western world have you ever looked
at any of those civilizations or
societies yeah the rate and incidence of
cancer is almost non-existent at least
it was almost non-existent but now some
of these chemicals have spread so far
and wide and one example being past
they're known as forever chemicals
because they don't degrade they can
travel so far they basically covered the
globe they are found in polar bear fat
so that just tells you how far up the
food chain these chemicals have traveled
because they don't break down so as soon
as an animal eats it and then gets eaten
by another animal so on and so forth
then it reaches the apex predators right
and it's in stored in their fat and in
polar bears it's been seen that you can
find some of these chemicals so we know
how far and wide that these chemicals
have gone that even these tribes that
are in remote locations aren't
necessarily exempt from being exposed
they're also getting exposed it's just
in the air it's in the water it's in the
soil and what chemicals are this PE fat
pasas P what what does that pfas so per
and polyfloral alkalol substances it's a
huge chemical class of about 15,000
different chemicals and that includes
things like
PFA pfos and PTFE which are more
commonly known as Teflon non-stick
chemicals like this non-stick pan that I
have here exactly so there that P is p P
yes PTFE is the chemical name for teflon
so Teflon is used to create the
non-stick coating and it is believed
that because it is so chemically stable
that it wouldn't come off the pan into
your food but that's not true there's
evidence showing that there is transfer
from the cookware in normal cooking
conditions into food not only that when
you heat that pan high enough it will
vaporize and get into the air and if you
inhale it you run the risk of
experiencing what's known as Teflon
flu and it basically has flu like
symptoms when you inhale that stuff and
so that would be considered an acute
exposure so a onetime higher dose
exposure but what we really need
information on are the chronic low doses
that we're getting just by cooking our
daily eggs on
there have that been any studies done on
the the impact of people cooking on
these versus people that don't cook with
these nonstick with the Teflon pans well
I can tell you that they've measured the
amount of chemicals that are coming off
of the pans and so if you've ever had a
non-stick piece of
cookware it scratches very easily yeah
and some of these scratches are
microscopic and invisible to the to the
naked eye Studies have found that a
surface scratch can release
9,000 particles from that nonstick
coating into your food and if it's a
crack
it that number jumps up to
2.3
billion particles that are transferred
into your food and what's that going to
do to my health what are these P fats
doing to my health well P fats are
linked with several types of cancers so
kidney and testicular cancer thyroid
disorders which thyroid problems are so
common these days but they're not
normal then we have increased risk of
miscarriage pre-term labor pre-term
birth preeclampsia which is high blood
pressure during pregnancy that's could
be deadly you also have increased
obesity that's linked with past
chemicals and past also contribute to an
increase in
endometriosis and PCOS oh
really so PE people who have
endometriosis and PCOS they have found
to have higher levels of pasas in their
bodies and pasas are found in everybody
no one's exempt everyone has pasas in
our bodies but whether or not they're
able to exert toxicity depends on your
inner environment depends on how many
other chemicals your body is working to
fight off I just pulled up some studies
here one of the studies from 2023 which
you might be aware of showed that higher
levels of pasas in the blood of women in
Singapore were associated with a 30 to
40% lower chance of pregnancy and life
birth within one
year um and another study sampled 3 81
blood samples from people trying to lose
weight and no matter the diet that these
participants tried they gained weight if
they had elevated past exposure what the
hell they gained weight even if they
tried different diets yeah so these
chemicals are known endocrine disruptors
are also known as obesogens so they're
increasing the prevalence of obesity so
you store more fat and you can't lose
it obesogens I thought food was the only
obesogen well the chemicals that you're
being exposed to through your cookwar
through food
packaging they're also sources of these
endocrine disruptors and what about
um cancer is pasas linked to cancer have
they done any studies on that with with
animals or yeah in humans it's kidney
and testicular
cancer okay what about prostate I know
that's a big concern for a lot of men
and particular I haven't seen direct
evidence on that but I wouldn't be
surprised if that was also linked
because that's also a hormonal
tissue a study from 2021 in mice at the
University of
Illinois found that a high fat diet
combined with pasas exposure could cause
changes in prostate cells that promote
tumor
growth is there is there an alternative
to P is there something that I could use
instead of this nonstick pan yeah just
get rid of the nonstick chemicals all
together and that would be something as
simple as cast iron stainless steel
glass cookware ceramic cookware just a
bit more annoying isn't it yeah I mean
non-stick cookware is amazing I mean you
you can make food slide off clean up is
a breeze but at what cost you're you
might be saving time when you're cooking
but how much of that time is being taken
off the back end of your lifespan is the
question Susan throw this away I would
but see that's the other thing is if you
are then hearing this and you're like I
got to get rid of my cookware well guess
what you throw that out and it ends up
in a landfill and the P fast chemicals
are now in the environment where they
won't go away so I'm throwing so it
really depends right if you are in the
position to where you can get rid of it
then it might benefit you but the key is
to really stop buying it but you already
have it so it's really up to you in
terms of cookwar that's that's better
for me avoid the non-stick go for
stainless steel cast iron what about the
utensils then so things like I've got a
plastic spatula here in my hand is this
good no because that's melting it's
breaking off into little tiny bits and
fragments of microplastics and
nanoplastics in your food so bad spatula
yes okay the the silicone the silicone
rubber the plastic if you just think
about the fact that it's being heated up
if you've ever looked at one the
Integrity you'll see it's starting to
fray if you see any bits coming off then
you know it's definitely breaking up and
getting into your food yeah there's
loads of little pieces missing from the
end of the plastic and I guess they
that's gone into the food most likely
right slowly dissolving over time right
because with nonstick cookware you can't
use metal utensils right you'll scratch
the surface but guess what even with
that you can scratch the surface so the
wooden one here in my left hand that's
better yes at least from a safety and
microplastic and nonstick chemical
perspective
yes are you concerned at all no not at
all okay so wood is fine wood is totally
fine okay what people normally will say
is I can't properly clean the wood but I
haven't had that issue you just clean it
with soap and water and it is fine okay
so we'll keep the wooden
spatula um um what else in terms of
cooking products so I've got this pan
here you're saying this is a good one
stainless steel yes great keep that
one keep that one um okay what
about what about this nice plastic
container super convenient put my lunch
in it go to work maybe pop it in the
microwave heat it up get my takeaway in
it plastic container good absolutely not
do not microwave plastic containers even
after just a few seconds you'll get
release of billions of microplastic
particles into your food just from a
tiny Square centimeter you'll get
billions of microplastic particles and
with microplastics they're hard it's a
solid Mass it does not break down in the
body what if it says BPA free that's
great but it's still plastic it's still
microplastic it's still nanoplastic
releasing and it probably has salades in
it depending on the type of
plastic
right okay so you don't want to be
microwaving these and and if I get
microplastics um into my food what's the
what's the net impact what's the harm of
that well microplastics don't break down
they don't go away again they're
accumulating in human tissues so they've
actually been found in a whole number
I'm pretty sure they're all over the
body at this point we just have to see
the the evidence to know right and so
they're in human L um lungs blood in the
gut tissue they're in heart they're in
brain they are in the placenta they're
also in penis and they have been
detected in there's microplastics in my
penis yes there could be Studies have
shown that and even in newborn babies so
when babies are born they have their
first bowel movement which is known as
meconium and in the moonium
microplastics have been found so that
means babies are being exposed to
microplastics In Utero they're being
born with Plastics in their body and
what's the risk of that well the risk is
that they don't go away number one and
on a cellular level they're causing
inflammation and oxidative stress and
oxidative stress is free radical damage
and what that means is if you ingest
these microplastic particles which
everyone is and they're in your tissues
and your body cannot get rid of them
then they're basically like the
equivalent of a million little fires all
over your body and unless you have
enough detox capability like
antioxidants to get rid of them they're
there to stay what do you mean by detox
capabilities as in my my liver and yeah
exactly every cell in your body has some
antioxidants in it if you if they if you
didn't you would be dead because in
order to live on this planet and breathe
oxygen we need
antioxidants to neutralize the free
radicals that happen through cellular
respiration right so whenever we breathe
oxygen there are free radicals that are
created and our cells have naturally in
them antioxidants like glutathione and
they help to neutralize these free
radicals but glutathion is also vital
for detoxifying environmental chemicals
so if you think about it how does the
body decide what's more important do I
neutralize these free radicals because I
need to breathe and live or do I have to
deal with these chemicals over here I
don't know so you're literally being
torn your body is torn at this point
what to deal with first and usually it's
the oxygen I need to breathe so let me
neutralize the free radicals from
breathing oxygen then I'll deal with
these chemicals later if I have enough
left in the tank and most people don't
modern lifestyles are resulting in
depletion of glutathione our glutathione
is being robbed by these microplastics
by these parabens phalates and other
chemicals that you find in consumer
products you have to sum up in a
sentence what microplastic are doing to
us what would that sentence be slowly
killing us over
time we're becoming plastic we're
actually known as the plasticine
Epic humankind is more plastic
eventually we will become more plastic
than we are humans if we cons continue
at this rate there have
been over 300 million metric tons of
plastics
produced I mean that's a really big
number but I can't really W my head
around it and they don't go away they
don't go away that's the problem they
just continually break up into smaller
and smaller and smaller and smaller
fragments a 2024 study on microplastics
in human livers kidneys and brains found
that all of them contained microplastics
but the brain contained 10 to 20 times
more than any other
organ the brains measured around 0.5%
plastic by weight that's a guardian
article so does that mean 0.5 5% of my
brain is plastic yes and that's because
plastic is fat soluble and the brain is
mostly fat so microplastics travel there
through the bloodstream we inhale them
they go to the brain and they can't
leave because the brain can the brain
doesn't not have the ability to detoxify
itself the way that other tissues
do I guess it wasn't expecting the
plastic right so it's like who's this I
can't get rid of you so just stay but
then what is it doing to you over time
time what is it doing to our brains over
time I'm going to throw this away by the
way I'm not going to micro my food in
plastic anymore um what is it doing to
our brains over time do you think is
there any
associations I haven't seen any clear
evidence but my hypothesis is that it's
increasing the likelihood of cognitive
decline and the brain is one of the most
important obviously the most important
organs in our bodies and brain problems
don't usually show up until you're in
your Elder years but i' would be
interested to know if the rate of
dementia if people are getting dementia
and other brain Related Disorders
earlier just like cancer I would not be
surprised if I saw that we drink out of
these um stainless steel cups here on
the dire of a CO are these okay to be
drinking out of yes okay does it say
because they're not they're not leeching
microplastics into your drink BPA free
stainless steel okay they weren't
expensive that's good news but um some
times when I go to shops and you know
supermarkets and stuff I grab these
plastic bottles full of water there's
been a lot of conversation around
plastic bottles and water um are these
safe to drink from in your opinion well
if you have no other option then that's
what you've got and so I don't want
people to think I can never drink
bottled water ever again or I'm going to
die because that's not the case I myself
traveled here I had to drink from
bottled water because I didn't bring
enough of my own water with me is that
something that I'm going to panic about
no it's not is it something that I want
to do no but I need water so that's my
only option but if you are able to avoid
that then absolutely avoid bottle water
have there been any studies done on
bottle water yeah there have been so
many studies showing that bottled water
is a major source of microplastics
Because if you think about it plastic
is not meant to be permanent but it kind
of is but at the same time there are
certain conditions that promote leeching
and one of them is if you put that
plastic water bottle in the sun
UV causes plastic to break down so
that's releasing microplastics just
squeezing it physical force is causing
microplastic sharing and
release but not just that just over time
the plastic is just leeching on its own
temperature is another Factor so if you
leave that in a hot
car microplastics if you've ever had a
bottle of water sitting in a hot car and
you drink it and it tasted like plastic
that's because it is it's plastic it's
becoming more plastic
okay but the microplastics are releasing
endocrine disruptors right the same
phades that we talked about in
fragrances are also in plastic water
bottles what about these water bottles
that a lot of people have now they're
kind of like Stanley cut star water
bottles that are made of this this metal
are these better yeah definit it's the
same as these stainless steel cups yeah
okay so everyone should have one of
these for their water but not only that
it's also more sustainable right because
plastic bottles make up the majority of
plastic waste in the environment and all
of those are breaking up again into
smaller and smaller microplastics and
nanoplastics that are basically
polluting everything
now okay so instead of that plastic
container I had this glass container for
the microwave and for my food is better
perfect okay but what about the lid the
lid has got these little plastic handles
on it
yeah so what I would do is take the lid
off if you need to heat up your food
okay and what I also do is keep a space
between my food and the lid so it's not
in direct contact with the plastic how'd
you keep it space like just don't fill
it all the way to the brim oh okay just
keep it just keep a little space Okay
cool so that's that's good it's it's the
contact with the plastic I mean if you
need the container and you need a lid to
store your
food okay this I mean I have those too
so we'll keep the lid just a thing is
just try to keep your food from touching
it if you can okay um what
about this coffee coffee cup I went to
you know you go to a Starbucks I'm
shouldn't say you go to a coffee shop
they give you these takeaway coffee cups
which are made of like this sort of
papery feel good bad
indifferent get rid of them they're
terrible so they're basically lined with
plastic and Studies have shown that
within 15 minutes of contact with the
hot liquid you're getting 25 5,000
microplastic particles in that cup and
most people some people don't drink
their coffee in 15 minutes they'll let
it sit longer and so the longer it sits
the more leeching there is and not only
that the lid is plastic so as the hot
liquid is passing through the lid there
could also be leeching of
microplastics that plastic lining also
leeches heavy metals so it's there are
so many issues with that cup you seem
really pissed off with the cup I'm
actually really they're so pervasive and
I remember being in Germany about 10 15
years ago maybe something like that and
coffee to go was new and at the time I
come from the US they have been around
forever I was like why is this new I
don't understand coffee to go why is
that a thing and my husband said it's
because we sit down and drink our coffee
out of a mug we don't take it to go so
this is like appealing to tourists but
what's wrong with coffee to go is it the
container they it's the container so if
you bring your own container Starbucks
will fill it up or if you bring your own
container some shops will fill it up for
you and they you they might even knock
off 10 cents because you brought your
own container so I'd have to bring
something like I guess like this which
is a steel right with a little glass lid
right okay so okay and it's a plastic
lid so if you can take the lid off to
drink but if you can't
again don't stress out over it okay You'
been through some of these things so far
just on the consumables okay fine okay
so um and last question on consumption
stuff is about food and water should I
be filtering my water absolutely
absolutely if you live in an area where
water has been floridated how do I know
you've got to check the water report
most municipalities have water reports
and if not you can go to the ewg the
environmental working group they have a
water report database that you can check
so just type in your ZIP code of where
you live and it'll tell you what
contaminants are found and which ones
exceed safe limits and it's very helpful
to know what if I get these kind of like
you know these little plastic um water
filter systems you can get where you put
it in the fridge you pour the water in
and then you put like a little filter
thing in you replace it and then you
pour it in are those good it depends on
what type of filter you have okay some
of the more mainstream lower cost lower
end options do not remove floor chlide
number one and they don't filter nearly
enough
chemicals tap water is a source of
hormones
so endocrine disruptors pesticides heavy
metals flu fluoride if it's added to the
water uh agricultural runoff there's a
bunch of different contaminants in tap
water depending on where you live some
are worse than others and there have
even been tragic instances of lead high
levels of lead because of the lead
piping that water is transported through
so we've got to be careful with the
water that we're using to drink and cook
with and so what what's a a sort of
lowcost solution to this for people that
are concerned about the water that
they're consuming and their families are
consuming yeah actually there have been
studies showing that you can boil your
water so if you boil your water that can
actually remove a significant portion of
the microplastic pollutions in there
because of if you've ever noticed at
after you've boiled water there's sort
of a white crust at the bottom of the
pot that's actually calcium
calcification and the microplastics get
trapped in that calcified layer but that
still doesn't take care of all the other
chemicals that are found in tap water so
the best option is to filter
it some filters are more accessible and
affordable than others reverse osmosis
removes the most contaminants but it
also requires the most it generates the
most waste water so it isn't the most
effici efficient and it also can remove
beneficial minerals which you then have
to add back in because it's not good to
drink demineralized water over time so
there are different options that you can
you can use but the best option you have
to filter it at some point at some level
depending on where you are so check your
water and look for a filter so carbon
filters are effective for the most part
but you want to check to make sure that
the filter can remove fluoride as well
okay well in the um show notes of
today's episode what I'll ask you to do
is to just help us put together a bit of
a list of things that you approve of um
relating to the subjects that we've
discussed today just you know some of
the deant stuff that we mentioned um and
also water filter systems and stuff
because I can imagine it can be quite
confusing for people I I imagine most
people listening they just want they
want to know what the most important
simple things that they can can do to
have the biggest potential impact and
also they're going to be quite costc
conscious as we all are about not
overspending on things and they don't
have thousands thousands of pounds but
they want to make significant steps
forward um I guess to that point then if
you were to say to someone what are like
the simple free things we can all do or
cheap things cost effective things we
can do as it relates to the our cookware
things we're
consuming um to make sure that we're
staying as healthy as we possibly can be
first thing is to filter your water yeah
second thing is to get rid of fragrance
products so you're actually saving money
by not buying that stuff right so if you
can remove that then you're better off
thirdly is to cook at home cooking at
home is also significantly more cost
effective than getting takeout all the
time and you're also saving on a massive
amount of toxic exposure that way what
about um the types of foods we
buy have I got to just be buying organic
food if you're able to then it's helpful
but if you can't eating an unprocessed
diet as much as you possibly can hold
Foods single ingredient Foods if you
choose to eat meat fruits and vegetables
things of that nature try to get the
least processed option you possibly can
and cook at home and if you can cook on
stainless steel or cast iron but if
nonstick is all you have that's all
you've got right so just do what you can
with what you've got but try to
eliminate the processed food as much as
you can what about beauty then so I've
got some beauty products here
moisturizers got some eyelin is um this
is a roll on deant you're probably
familiar with these yeah that looks like
an anti-perspirant oh an antiperspirant
oh yeah yeah you're right so that's
different than deodorant so
antiperspirants contain aluminum salts
and those physically block sweat ducts
and so what that does over time is it
prevents you from sweating right that's
why it's anti-perspirant but the problem
with aluminum is that there have been
links to increased risk of breast cancer
in young girls who use
deodorant because aluminum itself also
acts like an estrogen in the body oh God
it smells strong wow okay so these roll
on Deens that are for anyone that
doesn't isn't watching it's the one with
the ball on it the little ball thing
that you roll under your armpit the key
is to avoid the anti- pur Sprint if you
can and I know a lot of people have you
know self conern concerned with with
sweating and everything like that but uh
some people online have done armpit
detoxes so with Apple vinegar and
bentonite clay you make a little paste
out of it smear it under your arms and
that can help to pull out some of these
embedded particles in your sweat Ducks
what is the most compelling study that
you heard about as it relates to because
I am always I'm doing this podcast and
reading about this subject matter I am
increasingly concerned about you know
putting things under my armpit for a
number of reasons it's really hot under
there but then it just feels I don't
know it does then I read this stats
around breast cancer and I thought gosh
I'm it's probably not a good idea to be
like lathering chemicals under my under
my armpit um what is the most compelling
stud you read on this subject that made
you think twice about antiperspirants
yeah it was the increased risk of breast
cancer in young girls that are using
these underarm antiperspirants what
about these other beauty products then
throw that one away um everyday be
beauty products I think I don't even
know what these products are I mean that
looks like a foundation makeup that you
would put all over your face so you go
like this yeah okay or a concealer or
something like that to help even out
your skin tone cover up spots right good
so that goes all over your face right so
products that sit on your skin those are
known as leave on products those
comprise a higher risk than something
you would rinse off like a soap or a
body wash because it's sitting on your
skin so the contact time is longer the
longer something sits on your skin the
longer time it has to penetrate the skin
and get absorbed into your bloodstream
lipstick is also a high-risk product if
you're using the wrong kind because it's
going on your lips and you're having
some
ingestion so don't use Foundation no not
necessarily find a safer foundation so
avoid avoid the fragrance
foundations smells good this one yeah so
it's got fragrances in there I'm sure
okay because foundations are usually
made of chemicals right chemicals don't
always smell good so a lot of
manufacturers put fragrance in there to
maskk the odor even like lip balm I had
this conversation with my girlfriend the
other day and she was lathering on her
lip balm and I was like I don't know if
that's good for you and she was like it
just smells so good I was like I just I
don't know just do you know I have this
conspiracy theory about lip balm that
I've never shared with anybody which is
my girlfriend applies lip balm all the
time and her lips get dry often whereas
I don't apply lip balm ever any special
occasions no I'm joking I never apply it
and my lips don't seem to get dry unless
I go on a plane or something but I just
wonder sometimes if these cosmetic
products are fixing a problem that
they're
creating yeah I would think so because
if you never touched your face what
would your skin be like right some
people only use water on their face and
I have found personally the more I mess
with my face the more products I use the
more I end up feeling like I need them
because my skin is reacting differently
so it's I think it's creating an issue
that wasn't there and then comes in and
like oh this is the solution to that
it's brilliant if you think about it
from a money-making perspective but also
if I'm disrupting your hormones with all
of these chemicals then I'm more likely
to be causing you to have skin flare ups
and skin issues and and probably even
aging and wrinkles which you're then
going to need to use some of these
cosmetic products to s for right and
then they're going to try and sell you
some other more invasive procedures down
the line I've seen some people who don't
use skin products at all and have never
used them because of the society they
live in and they have unbelievable
remarkable skin um and they don't have
the flareups and all these kinds of
things that we have over here so it's
I've always been pretty dubious I think
I'm a bit of like an evolutionist I
don't know if that even is a thing but
just someone who has much more faith in
my my body's natural systems for dealing
with things than the modern world would
lead us to believe like I don't I know
that we live in an unnatural world right
so there are some things that we need I
live in you know we're indoors all day
so I probably should be taking some
vitamin D for example but outside of
that I just don't buy that we need all
of these products like you know shampoos
and conditioners and what do you think
of shampoos I've got shampoo brand here
um which I just got off the shelf in the
local shop a shampoo's okay yeah again
it's it depends on what the ingredients
are right most shampoos are heavily
fragran and heavily
scented but if you look you'll find some
that aren't smells
delicious yeah okay and it's very highly
likely that you can become addicted to
lip balm and addicted to scent I was
you're addicted to lip balm yeah like
you said The more you apply the more you
need it and then you just keep applying
it so it's every 10 or 15 minutes it
felt like at some point and I was using
a very heavily scented fragrance lip
balm when I was a teenager it just was
trendy at school what scent do you have
what flavor do you have and everyone was
doing it so it just became a thing what
about this this is a um this is a tampon
what about tampons I had a conversation
on this podcast with a a lady who had a
toxic reaction to a tampon and lost both
of her
legs um because of that what's your
thoughts on menstrual products generally
tampons period
pads menstrual products contain some of
the worst chemicals that should never be
in direct contact with your reproductive
tissues with your vaginal Canal they
should just should not be there things
like
Benzene there's heavy metals in tampons
actually there was a study showing that
women who use tampons had higher levels
of heavy metals in their body we don't
need those down there and fragrances
again with the phades they're also found
in tampons a lot of menstrual products
contain scent maybe that one doesn't but
there's a lot that do what's the
alternative it's entirely
unnecessary the alternative would be to
use you can you can find organic cotton
tampons tampons are made of cotton right
cotton is one of the most heavily
sprayed crops in the world with
glyphosate we don't need glyphosate down
there the problem is that the vaginal
Canal is uded right so it's it's blocked
off it's warm its body temperature and
there's also friction so all of these
factors increase and drive chemical
absorption into the body and you don't
want to be delivering some of these
chemicals directly to your reproductive
organs you think it's going to have a
big impact on
fertility I think it could in fact there
are a lot of anecdotal reports anyway of
people saying that when they switched
out their period products and went with
more organic and more sustainable
options that their periods became
easier some people close to me have PCOS
I've also got some friends that have
endometriosis is there a link between
Fates and sort of you know menstrual
products
and PCOS and endometriosis in your
opinion yes there is and there is a link
with past chemicals
too so these
xenoestrogens are exacerbating these
conditions because if you think about it
the uterus is an endocrine it's an
endocrine responsive tissue it's an
hormonally active it responds to
estrogen you're delivering let's say
phalates through tampons directly down
there it's going into the circulation
and it bypasses what's known as the
portal circulation Phase 2
detoxification by the liver so it
bypasses detoxification so you're
basically delivering hormonally active
chemicals directly where you don't want
them to go they cannot be
detoxified what about my
clothes you mentioned cotton a second
ago it made me think about the clothes
that I'm wearing um how do I know if the
clothes that I'm wearing are toxin free
are there certain clothes that are an
aunt that's a really good question
organic cotton is one way of knowing if
your clothes contain pesticides and
certain chemicals that are used in the
farming of cotton but not only that if
your clothes are made out of synthetic
Fiers like polyester nylon and acrylic
those release microplastics and they've
also been found to contain BPA which is
an endocrine
disruptor yeah you got you got to check
the tag around the side some sometimes
95%
polyester that's a source of
microplastics every time you wash it
every time you move there are
microplastics breaking off 5%
spandex that's also
synthetic so you're basically wearing an
entirely synthetic
shirt what about the chemicals that I
wash it in I've got some um this is
where I expose that I've never cleaned a
t-shirt properly in my life sugar
I've got
some fabric
cleaner thing
here I guess this is probably a source
of toxins I'm getting the hang of this
now toxins in pretty much right you
you've called it out you called it out
exactly right so if I fragrances if I
wash my clothes in this and then I put
the clothes on I'm exposing myself to
toxins let me see right because it's
it's covering your entire body right
wherever you have the clothing touching
your skin there's some friction there's
movement there's body heat there's
moisture that's increasing chemical
penetration and absorption into your
bloodstream so the solution there is if
you like scented laundry care products
is again to use essential
oils so instead of the drier sheets that
you get at the store those actually just
coat your clothing with some type of
oily waxy substance that's what makes
them feel soft they're not actually
softening your clothes they coat your
clothing and so all of that is touching
your skin it's rubbing how much of that
is getting absorbed right so if you can
instead look for wool dryer balls made
out of wool uh people put essential oils
in there and let it run through their
clothing I am something quite startling
that I read when I was going through all
of your work is that beauty and hair
products marketed to black women often
contain the most toxic ingredients
yes that is known as environmental
Injustice so that's one of the I would
say the most
tragic circumstances that we're facing
as a society is
that the people who are exposed to the
most amount of
toxins are lowincome people and people
in ethnic
groups and so some of these products
that are marketed specifically to black
girls contain some of the worst
ingredients I have ever seen and I think
it should be
outlawed like you said the fragrances
the endocrine disruptors these harsh
detergents some for Malahide releasers
for Malahide is a human carcinogen what
place does it have in a beauty and
personal care
product it doesn't it needs to be
removed there needs to be better
regulations and better protection for
vulnerable populations
I was um doing some research and I
looked at Harvard health and it said 50%
of products advertised to black women
contain endocrine disruptors which are
those disruptors that are going to
impact their hormones increase their
chance of things like cancer infertility
etc etc compared to roughly 7% that are
advertised to white women and these
endocrine disruptors can impact
fertility and increase their chance of
getting cancer why why is that why is
that the case
I think it has to do a lot with the
types of products that certain
demographics would gravitate towards so
depending on your hair type what kind of
products you might
need there really is no explanation to
why these toxic chemicals are in in
those products in particular in such
high numbers that's really the problem
is why is it more prevalent for those
populations than others and I think this
is an
ongoing societal issue of environmental
Injustice and to a certain extent
environmental
racism it really is um it really is yeah
you said you said it's a form of racism
and it's a form of sort of environmental
Injustice do people are people aware of
this I don't think so I think the vast
majority of people are entirely unaware
of this and studies show it because
there are studies showing that the
earlier you start using cosmetic
products the higher your chance of
coming down with breast cancer and the
people who had the highest
prevalence were
africanamerican
females so it I think it's a combination
of the fact that there is some level of
racism environmental Injustice but also
a cultural and
societal preference for certain products
so black women are at the highest risk
of getting breast cancer under the age
of 40
yes what can be done about that do you
think is is this uh something that the
government have to do something about or
is that is it both something that we
have to sort of increase our own public
consciousness of and make better
choices
um is there an easy solution to fix this
I I think if we wait for the government
to take action we'll be waiting for a
long time the Cosmetic regulations in
the United
States were not updated until recently
and before that the last update was when
they were actually created nearly a
hundred years prior a hundred years had
gone by no change to the Cosmetic
regulations none yet more and more
products are being churned out without
being tested without knowing what the
health effects are and then later on we
see increases in all of these diseases
that we've been talking about so I think
instead of waiting for the
government my goal and my purpose and my
passion is to empower people with
knowledge and solutions so they can take
steps to protect themselves is there a
funding issue with blackowned businesses
and sort of these black um beauty
products that is causal in all of this
in your opinion I think it really comes
down to whether or not the creators of
the product s are aware of these risks
and whether or not they are able to
formulate in such a way that they don't
use these types of ingredients and I
think that there has been a push for
clean
Beauty blackowned clean Beauty I've seen
it could it get cleaner yes I think so
so I think it's only a matter of time
before somebody creates it and so I'm
looking forward to that at my company
flight Studio which is part of my bigger
company flight group we're constantly
looking for ways to build deeper
connections with our audiences whether
that's a new show a product or a project
it's why I launched the conversation
cards I've relied on Shopify before
who's a sponsor of today's podcast and
I'll be using them again for the next
big launch which we'll hear about soon
and I use them because of how easy it is
to set up an online store that reaches
all of you no matter where you are in
the world with Shopify the usual pain
points of launching products online
Disappear Completely no matter the size
of your business Shopify has everything
you need to make your business go to the
next level and better connect with your
customers all over the world to say
thank you to all of you for listening to
my show we're giving you a trial which
is just $1 a month you can sign up by
going to shopify.com
Bartlet that's shopify.com Bartlet or
find the link in the description
below every single time you eat you have
an opportunity to improve your health
that's why I love Zoe because it helps
me to make the smartest food choices for
my body as you guys probably know zoee
is a sponsor of my podcast I'm also an
investor in the company which is
important to say I invested in the
company because Zoe combines My Health
Data with their worldclass science using
these two things Zoe guides me to Better
Health every single time I make a food
choice in eat which means I have more
energy better sleep better mood and I'm
less hungry and the best part about Zoe
is that it's backed by their recent
clinical trial something called the
method study which is the gold standard
of scientific research I started Zoe
just over year ago now and I've been
able to track my progress week after
week so I can learn how to be even
smarter the week after and if you
haven't joined Zoe yet I'm going to give
you 10% off when you join Zoe today just
use the code stepen 10 at checkout so
many of you have asked me for a bloody
code for Zoe and here is your
opportunity steveen tet checkout there
may not be another one before we start
these podcasts what we always do is we
light some candles and this is one of
the candles that we
light um what's you mentioned I think
you mentioned candles earlier on at the
start of the conversation but what's
your opinion on candles are they safe
smells depend on what type of candle you
have there's basically a safer
alternative for pretty much any product
that you can think of so I'm not one
that says across the board candles are
toxic it's very specific conventional
candles paraffin wax scented candles
which is what you'll see in stores the
majority of candles out there are the
ones that we shouldn't be burning
so this is a scented
candle it doesn't say what type of wax
it
is so we can be pretty certain that this
is a
paraffin wax candle at least using the
precautionary principle we should assume
that something is guilty before it's
proven innocent so unless we know for
sure that this is not a paraffin wax
candle I wouldn't light
it so because if I light it then I'm
pushing toxic chemicals into the air
exactly so conventional
Candles there are five main reasons why
I would not burn a conventional candle
number one is that when you light those
candles they liberate carcinogens like
Benzene toine and formaldahyde but not
only that ultrafine particles ultrafine
particles are some of the most hazardous
substances that you can create in your
home
so ultra fine particles are tiny
particles less than 100 microns in
diameter excuse me less than 0.1 microns
in diameter 100 nanometers invisible to
the human
eye tiny and these particles have the
ability to as soon as you inhale them
they'll go into your brain they have the
ability to do that they also have the
ability to go as far down into the lung
as one can go all the way down to the
Alvi and down in those microscopic
structures of the lung that's where gas
exchange happens there's only one cell
layer separating the outside from the
inside your bloodstream one cell that's
not pretty much nothing that's pretty
much no separation no protection so if
AN ultrafine particle can get that down
far down into your lungs it's guaranteed
into your bloodstream it's getting all
over your body it's causing inflammation
and oxidative stress which are the basis
of many chronic diseases so ultra fine
particles we need to avoid them as much
as possible and so one way is to not
light a conventional candle number two
is that they're also releasing volatile
organic compounds right as I mentioned
number
three they contain undisclosed
fragrance and within fragrance there can
be endocrine disruptors carcinogens and
allergens so when you like these candles
you're getting all of these toxins into
your Air number four some of the dyes
that are used used to color candles are
carcinogenic and nobody has any idea is
if you burn them what are the health
effects of burning these carcinogenic
dieses and number five candles are
largely unregulated which means that if
you were to look at that candle and it
says soy
blend there can be
paraffin wax in there even though it
says soy blend a lot of people think soy
blend oh it comes from soy it must be
healthier for me so they'll go for that
but if it says soy blend one should
assume that it's a majority of petroleum
derived paraffin wax with a little bit
of soy wax in
there because the consumer product
safety commission which regulates
candles doesn't look at the ingredients
in the candle they're concerned with the
vessel the container of the candle
whether or not it's fireproof and
whether or not the lead contains Wick or
the wick contains
lead they're not looking at what's in
the wax but Studies have shown that when
you light these candles you are
liberating a significant number of
hazardous
chemicals so
uh we shall use incense instead incense
is even
worse and I'm sorry to burst your bubble
but incense is used by has been used for
thousands of years but incense as we
know it now is not the same as incense
that was used a thousand years ago they
now contain conin again phades the
endocrine disruptors but also the ultra
fine particles and Studies have shown
that incense creates more ultrafine
particles in pollutants than cigarette
smoke there's an increased risk of
cancer because these ultrafine particles
are damaging DNA damaged DNA leads to
mutations mutations can lead to cancer
there's an increased incidence of cancer
in Temple workers so people who are
around incense for hours upon hours at a
time there's an increased risk of cancer
not only that there's an increased risk
of cancer almost
threefold in children whose parents
burned incense in the
home okay W okay so no incense my house
is going to stink well you can use
there's different candles that you can
use so based on my research I looked I
was really hellbent on finding what is
the type of candle that has the lowest
emissions the least emissions because
let's let's make it I want to make it
really clear anytime you burn something
that's not necessarily
healthy but does it mean that you can't
do whatever no if you find a candle that
is low emission like beeswax essential
oils wooden or cotton wicks then that's
a much better alternative than your
conventional paraffin wax scented candle
brightly
colored one of the things that I guess
is kind of adjacent to this inhaling
chemicals is vaping it's really
interesting cuz over the last couple of
years um vaping has become more and more
popular around the world I think
cigarettes have declined and especially
amongst young people more and more
people in my friendship group anyway are
vaping now more than ever what are your
thoughts on vaping is that is that
harmful
yes
vaping vaping fluid liquid is a chemical
mixture that you are inhaling and these
chemicals have not been tested for
inhalation
safety namely the flavors and the
fragrances that are used
specifically the flavors have not been
tested for inhalation because they're
intended for oral ingestion to be eaten
so they're not tested for inhalation
safety I used to work in a flavor and
fragrance company and that was one of
the biggest issues was that people were
putting these chemicals that were not
tested into these Vapes and the health
effects are unknown but now that's been
10 15 years we know that vaping is not
healthy shisha you like a hookah I guess
you call it a hookah in America I mean
that's even worse isn't it there is also
a lot of risk associated with with hook
I did it earlier and it was like it said
it was the equivalent of 100 cigarettes
having a shisha which is um annoying
because from time to time when I'm in
the Middle East I'll go to one of these
Shisha bars whatever with some of my
friends but when I read that it's
equivalent to like 100 cigarettes I
thought I'm never doing that again it's
just really not worth it um and speaking
of being in the Middle East and these
sort of big builtup cities one of the
things I've thought a lot about more
recently is air quality air quality both
indoors and Outdoors what do I need to
know about air quality indoors and
Outdoors air quality indoors can be up
to five times worse than air quality
outside which shocks a lot of people
that stat comes from the Environmental
Protection Agency the EPA the reason
being is that people people are not
adequately ventilating their homes and
we're doing things like cooking cooking
generates particulate matter too but do
we need to stop cooking no but we need
to prioritize what's important and
what's not important burning candles how
important is that to you make sure
you're choosing a better candle make
sure you're opening the windows indoor
air is absolutely imperative if you want
to improve your health you have to clean
up your indoor air keep my shoes at the
door
I heard you say that
before this shocks a lot of people but
there are simple ways to improve your
indoor air quality and one of them is
taking off your shoes not wearing your
outside shoes in your home that doesn't
mean you have to go barefoot you can
wear slippers you can wear other shoes
that are specifically meant to stay
indoors and that's because shoe souls
are vectors for feal material poop
pathogenic bacteria and viruses heavy
metals industrial chemicals
pesticides things that are outside
should stay outside but didn't we used
to live outside as a species right but
when we lived outside there weren't all
these cars and factories that were
spewing all of this exhaust all over the
place dust our house on a regular basis
you said as well Hoover sweep more
regularly and you said keep plants in
the house plants yeah yeah indoor plants
make sure that if you have indoor plants
they can be really beneficial for
well-being they can help to purify the
air to some extent but they can also
Harbor mold in the soil so just make
sure check your house plants for mold
what do does humidity of my house matter
because a lot of people are getting
these dehumidifiers in their house now
yeah humidity can increase the growth of
mold and mold is extremely toxic so you
want low humidity yes you want to keep
your humidity in you know a steady range
so have one of those little humidity
monitors they're just a couple dollars
you can find them at almost any store
and try to keep your humidity um you
know on the lower end we don't want it
necessarily too high because then that
will promote mold growth so what about
seasons is are there particular seasons
where our houses become more and more
toxic definitely during the colder
months people don't open their Windows
enough some of us are lighting more
candles some people like to light wood
and burn wood fireplaces and stoves
what's wrong with that those create the
most ultrafine particles that you can
imagine in your home these uh ultrafine
particles nitrogen dioxide polycylic
aromatic hydrocarbons these are all
carcinogens they are created when you
burn things and burning wood in your
home is one of the worst things that you
can do if you can avoid it if you don't
need it to survive consider something
else but I've got a chimney right it
doesn't always stay in there it doesn't
only go up it can come
out so how do I so a better way to keep
my home is just by doing like the you
know the central heating the hot water
central heating yeah underfloor heating
right but make sure you open the windows
on a regular basis too because you want
to exhaust the old stale air and you
want to replace it with fresh air so
aside from people who live near a busy
highway most people should be able to
open their Windows even in cold months
in Germany there's a a practice called
Luft lufton where you open the windows
even in the dead of winter and it lets
in fresh air it refreshes the stale air
and it makes such a huge difference on
our health I was reading about indoor
air pollution and there's some some
research done by the World Health
Organization that says household air
pollution was responsible for 3.2
million Global deaths per year this is
because household pollution can cause
deadly health problems such as pneumonia
pulmonary disease lung cancer strokes
and cardiovascular disease the combined
effects of outdoor air pollution and
household air pollution are associated
with 6.7 million Global premature deaths
annually according to the World Health
Organization I mean it's difficult isn't
it living in cities with so much um
outdoor pollution as well and there's
not really a solution to that I mean we
could go around wearing like masks or
something all day but it's just not
going to it's not going to be a good way
to live right I mean if you're able to
get an air purifier that can help with
your indoor environment but the key is
to remove the sources of pollution as
much as you can just try not to create
it and then you don't have to spend as
much time trying to clean it up you
mentioned earlier the body has a
antioxidant called
glutathione is it possible to increase
my levels of this compound if it's good
for me is there something I can do
there's so much you can do okay there's
so much you can do number one you can
exercise exercise increases glutathione
it's very simple just exercise move your
body and where is glutathione produced
it's mainly produced in the liver and
kidneys and the third highest amount of
glutathione in the body is in the testes
and the ovaries because it plays a vital
role in protecting our reproductive
organs from toxicity and ensuring
fertility it's a chemical it is
technically a chemical it's made out of
three amino acids glutamate cysteine and
Glycine and we all have it everyone has
glutathione some people have more some
people have less it really just depends
on your genetics some people just
genetically make more of it than others
and if I make more of it then my body's
going to be less toxic is that a simple
way of thinking about it yes very
simplistically right but that that's not
counting your lifestyle okay and what
about my lifestyle could make it worse
and lower what can what can impact my
gluton levels What can make it low the
nonstick cookware the heavily fragranced
products eating ultr processed foods not
exercising so being stagnant not moving
enough that all of that reduces your
glutathione not sleeping well what about
alcohol alcohol absolutely depletes
glutathione we know that alcohol targets
the liver glutathione detoxifies alcohol
if you don't have enough glutathione you
can't detoxify alcohol alcohol can cause
cancer so if I'm drinking heavily and
I'm also consuming a lot of these other
toxic chemicals because of just my
everyday life then my glutathion is
going to be depleted because it's so
focused on that alcohol detoxifying the
alcohol that it won't there won't be
enough left to detoxify the rest of my
body is that a simple way to think about
it right and all the other chemicals
that you're being expose you okay so you
want to keep your gluton levels high
right I read that the healthy gluton
levels in an adult is
553 which is 90 milles per liter of
total GL glutathion in their blood
um so I want to I want to increase my
glutathion levels to make sure that I
have a better natural defense to all of
these toxic chemicals in my life I'm
going to start exercising I'm going to
avoid un ultr processed foods I'm going
to eat Whole Foods yes Whole Foods but
specifically sulfur rich foods because
glutathione contains cysteine which
contains sulfur and sulfur is the part
of the glutathion molecule that's doing
the work that's protecting us so the
more sulfur you can give your body the
more building blocks it has to make GL
thione so we we eat things like leafy
greens broccoli cruciferous
vegetables meat eggs dairy can also help
to increase it there's even some studies
showing that if you consume wheight
protein it can help to increase
glutathione by supplying the amino acids
needed to to produce it and matcha green
tea is also a really good source of
glutathione building blocks but I think
what we need to do is also remove the
chemicals that are depleting our
glutathione and that's through choosing
better products not stressing as much
and then adding on how can we build and
add more glutathione with the lifestyle
changes making sure you get adequate
sleep if you don't sleep well enough
that's going to impact the amount of
glutathion you have as well
interesting cigarettes cigarettes
absolutely get rid of cigarettes
cigarettes deplete glutathion you
mentioned matcha there I am I'm one of
the um owners I'm an investor in a a
matcha company a matcha green tea
company what's your opinion of I mean
I'm exposing my bias here obviously but
what's your opinion of matcha I think Ma
matcha is amazing if you get the right
type of matcha you want to look for
organically grown matcha look for ones
that are tested for heavy metals because
heavy metals can accumulate in tea
plants that's just naturally occurring
so you want to look for matcha that's
been tested and because you're consuming
the entire Leaf it's important to look
for the cleanest matcha you can get but
there are so many benefits to matcha
like the fact that it helps you increase
glutathione is I'm sold I'm sold on it
do you drink matcha I do but we also
want to avoid not adding Dairy to a
matcha I know that a lot of people like
to drink matcha lattes but there's
actually studies showing that the casine
protein can decrease the absorption of
some of the beneficial compounds in
matcha so if you can drink it the
traditional way in Japan is just water
no sugar nothing just Macha and water
the company I'm referring to are um
obviously I've got to disclose my
there's probably probably got to say
hashtag ad hashtag sponsored whatever um
I'm an investor in a company it's called
perfect Ted and it's absolutely exploded
in the UK I spoke to them this morning
actually and they told me that their
sales have increased 5x since last year
because I think people are looking to
shift away from some of the canned
Energy Products and there's a lot of
sort of energy benefits with mat
and now if you go to like a Joe in the
juice or any of these like blank Street
coffee or or Tesco or whatever you can
find um their products in there and it
seems to be like there's a bit of a
revolution going on with energy and
matcha which is very very exciting
because I've for many years I was
drinking some I don't want to name any
names but I was drinking some of these
Energy Products that you'll find and um
it I just felt bad and there's something
about the like energy curve of matcha
which I I think is better I I feel like
I'm less susceptible to crashes with
matcha I don't know if there support
that but it's good to hear that it's
also um it increases my glutathione
levels which will help me have less of a
toxic body yes absolutely because it is
in and of itself a strong antioxidant
with anti-cancer properties and it can
help to increase the production of
energy in ourselves and so one of the
things that is required to create
glutathione is ATP and a lot of these
environmental chemicals are targeting
the mitochondria which are the
powerhouses of the cell that make ATP so
if you're knocking down the energy
center of the cell and it's not able to
make ATP you're not able to detoxify you
you will feel sluggish and over time
diminish the quality of your life what
is the most important thing we we
haven't spoke about today that you're
most passionate about is there anything
that we missed
that you think is particularly important
to the many people that are listening
right now I think the one thing that I
want to emphasize more than anything is
to not feel fear chemicals I want there
to be empowerment and not fear because
chemicals are all around us all the time
whether or not you're aware of it but
not everything is going to kill us so
being in a state of confidence and
knowing that hey I've done taken some
very simple steps that I know will have
a big impact on my life in the long term
that's what I want everyone to walk away
with I'm just thinking about the simple
changes that I can make immediately I
think the the big things that I have as
takeaways are get rid of the
antiperspirants that I've been using get
rid of the doents that I've been using
transition away from the non-stick pans
stop consuming
anything
plastic if it's especially if it's been
heated so like plastic cups from coffee
shops and plastic trays that you
microwave things in um my water you said
that was really critical yeah um air
quality air quality it's quite difficult
to do something about air quality but I
guess the simple thing is to open the
windows and doors more often clean the
house keep the shoes at the
door get rid of the scented and
fragrance products the scented plugins
the air fresheners I just thinking about
my dog I was like you know I do love my
dog but I don't want to be to what what
what's your thoughts on pets well pets
can actually increase the amount of
pollutants in your air but again if
you're cleaning your home on a regular
basis it's not a problem there's so many
benefits to having pets and cleaning the
pets as well yeah yeah so maybe consider
wiping off their paws when they come
back in from a walk is there anything
else that you're you're working on at
the moment or any research that you're
particularly curious about any
hypotheses you have that are bubbling
away in your mind
about toxins in our environment that
you're yet to maybe share with the
world I'm waiting to find out more about
microplastics and the diseases that are
associated with microplastics I think
that is the next
emerging toxin of the year and I think
more awareness needs to be brought
around microplastics and just more
research is urgently needed it's I think
yeah you make a really good point that
none of us are ever going to reach
Perfection and that shouldn't
necessarily be the goal but the a worthy
goal and a goal that we can all aim for
is just to be better in some way as it
relates to um our environment to improve
our environment in even small ways and
even the small improvements as you've
said when you talked about the dose um
and you talked about uh how these things
compound in our bodies over time even
small improvements made today can have
big impacts over the long term and so
small improvements small things that we
can change and not getting bogged down
because our life and our environment is
so full of toxins and it's always going
to be really there's not a scenario
we're going to live in where it's not
the case but small things we can do can
have big imp impacts and as you said you
youve made changes to your life and it
it's been the cause or fact of you
having a family which is which is which
is a beautiful thing um we have a
closing traditional on this podcast
where the last guest leaves a question
for the next guest not knowing who
they're leaving it for the question
that's been left for you is if you could
solve any problem in the world but only
one problem what would it be the problem
of toxins that's too easy isn't it
predictable that's too easy of course it
would be toxins hands down immediately
if I could just remove all of these
toxic chemicals from our environment and
just eliminate them not send them into
outer space but just remove them from
the face of the Earth and just have them
cease to exist that would be the most
amazing achievement I could ever imagine
and What would life be like in such a
world I imagine it to be like a Utopia
people aren't sick people aren't ill
people are well and happy and thriving
and just radiating radiant that's how I
see it Dr yon burkart where can people
find you if they want to learn more
about your work what's the best place
for them to to go to get um yeah more
information I have a website Dr bart.com
I also have a newsletter that I send out
called Low talkx talks and you can also
find me on Instagram at Dr Ivon burkart
and I also have a YouTube channel where
I love to do deep Dives and get really
really geeky and nerd out on one Topic
at a time okay I'll link all of that
below so everyone can find you um thank
you so much for the work that you do so
incredibly important and it's so
incredibly Illuminating because it's God
it's so mad that we um that it's only
recently in the last couple of years
that these conversations have emerged
the things about microplastics and um
endocrine disruptors and the link this
has to fertility our health obesogen all
of these kinds of things it's so crazy
that this conversation's only emerged in
the last couple of years because growing
up there was no mention of this in my
household there was absolutely no
mention and I just wonder how life could
have been different for myself but also
for so many millions of people all
around the world if we were aware of
this information it's not to say again
that we can we can live perect lives and
that's never the goal it's never my goal
my goal is just to have more access to
information so I can um make small steps
and often low cost steps in the right
direction and if that increases my
probability of having kids which is the
season of life that I'm in now and it
increases the probability that my kids
are healthy um when they grow up then
that is an amazing thing and that is the
work you're doing you're doing an
amazing thing so thank you so much Dr
ion Bart um I highly recommend everyone
goes and checks out your YouTube channel
it will send you down a really important
Rabbit Hole um because you make really
really accessible great videos on that
channel um so thank you so much for your
time today and thank you for the work
that you're doing thank
you I'm going to let you into a little
bit of a secret you're probably going to
think me and my team are a little bit
weird but I can still remember to this
day when jamaa from my team posted on
slack that she changed the scent in this
studio and right after she posted it the
entire office clapped in our slack
Channel and this might sound crazy but
at the Diary of a SEO this is the type
of 1% Improvement we make on our show
and that is why the show is the Way It
Is by understanding the power of
compounding 1% you can absolutely change
your outcomes in your life it isn't
about drastic Transformations or quick
wins it's about the small consistent
actions that have a lasting change in
your outcomes so two years ago we
started the process of creating this
beautiful diary and it's truly beautiful
inside there's lots of pictures lots of
inspiration and motivation as well some
Interac Dev elements and the purpose of
this diary is to help
identify stay focused on develop
consistency with the 1% that will
ultimately change your life we have a
limited number of these 1% Diaries and
if you want to do this with me then join
our waiting list I can't guarantee all
of you that join the waiting list will
be able to get one but if you join now
you have a higher chance the waiting
list can be found atth diary.com I'll
link it below but that isthe diary.com
[Music]
a